hello and welcome to an experimental
podcast of a Kind recorded exclusively
on air chat I'm going to record a long
series of chips and much the way I'd
record a regular podcast but then I'm
going to open it up to discussion and
I'm also going to export my section of
the conversation onto other platforms so
this is an experiment to see how this
kind of thing might work
my purpose here will be in large part to
distinguish between four different kinds
of thing that go under the umbrella of
bayesianism
these four things are basis theorem
Bayesian statistics
Bayesian reasoning and Bayesian
epistemology
these four things are often conflated in
the minds of those who call themselves
Bayesian and when explanations are
proffered of any one of these things
it's presumed they apply to the other
three as well I want to show this is not
the case
one reason for the existence of
different kinds of so-called bayesianism
is to help people with a domain known as
decision theory in other words how to
make decisions
so I'm going to begin with some context
take a step back before we even get to
any discussion of bayesianism and talk a
little bit about what knowledge is
because knowledge is the thing that
allows us to make decisions so I'm going
to talk epistemology
the business of epistemology is
knowledge what it is and how it grows
the very thing that should allow us to
make decisions
if we can understand knowledge when we
have it and when we don't have it then
we can have a rational discussion about
the place of trying to make decisions
and how to rationally make decisions
especially in the absence of good
explanations
but we would want to have good
explanations and rely upon those where
we can in order to make rational
decisions
if after this discussion we realize
there are still gaps and maybe there's a
place for bayesianism but if our
discussion of epistemology reveals that
all decisions can be made on a rational
basis without being concerned about
feelings intuitions or things that Bayes
often talks about like confidence then
what place is there for bayesianism so
let me do that first and then we'll move
on to bayesianism
knowledge builds over time objective
improvements are made everywhere
everywhere but science is the most
obvious case in point the predictions
that one theory in physics makes like
Newtonian physics
become improved in a new theory that
replaces it like Quantum serial
relativity Newton's theory of gravity
can be used for a GPS system but your
accuracy will be on the level of only
hundreds of meters something like that
GPS programs with general relativity
however is capable of a resolution or
accuracy down to millimeters it's highly
precise
but and this is so crucial to appreciate
knowledge is not just about making
predictions
better theories explain more about what
actually exists now never mind what is
going to happen in the future
from general relativity we get that
curved space-time exists now and
everywhere and always has we get black
holes we get gravitational waves we get
an expanding Universe none of these
things are even mentioned under
Newtonian gravity
better theories tell us more about what
actually exists and what the causal
relationships between them are and they
tell us what is possible and what is
impossible
laws of physics science more broadly
rules out more and more over time
allowing you to see what's possible but
basically telling you what can't happen
because there's a law of nature in your
way
all of that this understanding and
explanation ruling out as a byproduct
sometimes if you're lucky like in
physics allows for predictions to be
made that's not the Central Point that's
just a happy byproduct sometimes of some
areas of science
rather often in science predictions
cannot in principle be made
and the theory will tell you why
Darwinism explains why we cannot predict
what kind of creatures will evolve
because the process of evolution by
natural selection is blind the mutations
aren't as random as anything can be
random in so far as that word means
something you know literally cosmic rays
from the other side of the universe can
arrive crashing through the atmosphere
and into the DNA and change the germline
genetic code causing a mutation that can
then become the cause of some radical
change and the creation of a new species
none of that the arrival of a cosmic ray
from billions of light years away could
possibly have been predicted ahead of
time and so therefore the arrival of new
species cannot be predicted then the
mutations can't be the whole process is
a realm of the not predictable
so what's knowledge then
knowledge is information that gets
copied it solves a problem and so it's
useful in other words knowledge is
information with causal power
a lot of information is useless it gets
discarded but the stuff that is written
down or copied over and over again
that's the stuff we say we know and we
do not forget
the most significant kind of knowledge
in the universe is explanatory knowledge
an explanation is a hard to vary account
of what exists what it does how it does
it and why it does it it solves some
problem it solves a problem with the
knowledge that existed before it was
created
and in itself when Creator becomes a
solution to that problem
in doing so it actually goes on to solve
yet more problems the creator of the
original knowledge never dreamed of this
is called reach
reach includes things like well you know
Einstein possibly never thought of the
GPS system certainly not as we know it
now but yet here we are using it every
time we open up Google Maps
that's reach Einstein's theory solving
problems today he could never have
dreamed of Einstein's mind reaching into
the future to places and times and to
people he himself would never meet and
never be a part of it reaches out from
his pen and paper the equations on his
Blackboard to the rest of the universe
in principle
the most modern understanding of
knowledge we have comes to us from David
Deutsch who speaks of knowledge as being
a kind of abstract catalyst
it is information that solves a problem
and so it has causal power as I say it
changes or transforms the world around
us knowledge is also substrate
independent like many abstract things
are this means it can be represented in
various physical forms while being
identical to none of them
what I am doing right now here at this
very moment is communicating to you my
knowledge about knowledge that we call
epistemology and to me it begins as
neurons firing in my brain or as ideas
in my mind those are two ways or two
levels of emergence that talk about
exactly the same phenomenon which is
then becoming Taps on a keyboard when I
wrote this script for this podcast and
when I did that typing they then
illuminated pixels on a screen so we've
gone from neuron to Taps on a keyboard
to illuminate pixels on a screen
but it doesn't end there of course the
knowledge which is represented in words
of the transcript are now being spoken
aloud by me I'm reading them for the
light the pixels on the screen become
sound waves then they become electrical
signals again in a computer and a
different kind of light when they are
traveling through optic fibers they're
all being encoded in a sequence of zeros
and ones as the presence or absence of
light and electrical potentials when
it's transmitted to your computer and
routed through many other computers we
call the internet
eventually this knowledge which began as
firings of neurons in my brain or ideas
in my mind ends up once more as
electricity again and magnetic forces
causing the vibration of a thing called
a speaker near your ear somewhere which
is vibrating the air and you can hear it
because the eardrum in your ear vibrates
along with the vibrating air and all of
that is converted back into a chemical
Electro signal along your auditory nerve
to your brain where it's interpreted by
your mind
that's a long chain of interpretation
changing of so-called instantiations
physical representations of the
knowledge that was once in my brain
before it gets to your brain lots of
Errors can happen along the way and you
have to interpret what I've said
modulo all the errors in transmission
that might have happened and have been
corrected or not between the
transmitting of my ideas to the
understanding of those ideas in your
mind
what I transmit doesn't Faithfully get
to you because you have to try and
understand what I'm saying
another thing worth mentioning here is
that knowledge can be represented
not merely in Minds that's just one part
of this whole chain of transmission of
communication
it can be represented as I say it's
pixels on the screen as sound waves
vibrating but it can also be represented
in objects like books or even objects
like my favorite example is the
telescope the telescope instantiates the
knowledge of how to collect focus and
magnify light and objects to form an
image
the bridge is another good example a
bridge instantiates knowledge about a
part of engineering physics that we call
Statics so the Thing Remains up
something as complex as a suspension
bridge
instantiates contains within its
physical structure a lot of Highly
inexplicit knowledge
explanations that were made explicit by
the engineers that built the thing
designed the thing as well as the
physicists some of whom include Newton
for example who explained a lot of the
original physics that allowed for the
engineering to design and then build
this thing as well as explicit ideas
about geology also now inexplicitly
represented in the way in which the
bridge holds itself up and explanations
from Material science and chemistry and
so it goes
the bridge itself contains the knowledge
it really does
you want to be able to explain to people
should they ask why the thing will stay
up
if you do this at no point do you need
to worry about falling back on trust or
confidence or belief it's about the
presence of a set of good explanations
that anyone if they wanted to check
would be able to check and understand
a person that checks the knowledge about
how a bridge ties up we'll end up coming
to know that the engineers know what
they're doing
and the engineers who build the bridge
know that the geologists who say that
the rock foundations are strong and are
not going to shift have good
explanations and all of them know that
the materials scientists and chemists
can explain why the steel of which the
structure is made will not corrode at
least not for a very long time and this
can be prevented with paint and so on
and so forth there are processes to slow
such corrosion and everyone knows that
as things do Decay well you know errors
are inevitable but maintenance can be
done just in time and regularly in other
words error correction can occur along
the way or because we know what the good
explanation of modern bridge building is
so the bridge itself contains knowledge
and if a space-faring alien visited
Earth from a planet which was purely a
gas giant in every city they ever knew
floated around and they flew everywhere
and bridges like ours were utterly
unknown as nothing ever had to be
anchored to the solid crust of a
terrestrial planet because they're not
coming from one those aliens could if no
one was there to explain it to them
reverse engineer the bridge and extract
from it the knowledge we had about all
those things to understand and therefore
explain exactly what this structure was
for the knowledge is there it's in the
bridge not written as words or symbols
but literally in the relationships
between the beams and the cables and the
roadway and the pylons and so on and so
forth
oh there you go phew that's substrate
Independence if ever there was some
the knowledge I have gets to you by
going through all these different kinds
of materials represented in everything
when I'm speaking from light to Sound
electricity and magnetism and chemicals
and so on and so forth but it's the same
knowledge what I'm telling you now is
the same knowledge and what the aliens
would learn from deconstructing the
bridge would be the same knowledge that
the engineers had modulo errors in
modulo for example when I'm talking to
you your different interpretation from
my intentions because we might
understand language subtly differently
have or apply different meanings to
words and terms
so that's what knowledge is all about at
no point you will notice at no point did
I need to refer to psychology human
minds and the emotional content of
people's feelings about certainty or
belief or confidence
our proverbial aliens for example may
come to understand the engineering of
the bridge by extracting out
explanations of physics and Material
Science that humans use to construct a
thing but but they do not extract out
our confidence or belief in any of this
stuff instead they will extract theories
of science
at no point do they need to refer to our
confidence they refer instead to how
people understood physics
as we can and as they would
likely they would understand the physics
a lot better than what we do because
they will have crossed the Galaxy in a
spacecraft
in short the knowledge people had and
have about physics and bridge building
is just that physics and Bridge Building
psychology and emotion was only there as
a kind of intention
the people hoped one day to cross the
water or the chasm whatever it is more
quickly they intended to do so and made
a choice to build a bridge and they did
so hope and intention got the project
going but from there on motivation drove
them but it was objective rational
science that they applied knowledge of
the physical world to check the
knowledge was a genuine good explanation
required no emotions
we leave a motion out of it
aliens from the other side of the Galaxy
would be people too humans are people
AGI will be people people are the
entities that create explanations no
other system creates new explanations
people have their own problems uniquely
and we solve them uniquely that's our
defining characteristic a cat may have a
problem of being hungry but it slavishly
follows its instincts it seeks out food
and it eats if there's no food in its
house then it's stuck it'll starve to
death it can't open the door it can't
call for help nothing it's repertoire of
possible behaviors is bounded utterly by
its programming it's genetic code its
instincts
a person on the other hand may have the
problem of being hungry but actively
avoid food because they are obese and
choose not to eat as they are dieting
and realize eating more is not good for
them despite their hunger an anorexic
person may have an explanation
completely false that their hunger is a
false signal given they're actually
incorrect theory that they are obese
when they are not people routinely defy
their instincts
cats indeed or other animals never go
through this kind of thing they don't
conjecture new ideas about the world
anything about the world only people do
a person who runs out of food
understands they can buy more food they
can call a delivery service they can
just leave their house and talk to
someone and ask for food the
possibilities are quite literally
endless unbounded and not contained
within their genetic code
the mind of a person creates new
possibilities as soon as the old ones
fail
ideas that succeed are solutions so
they're typically remembered they are
the information that works so they
constitute knowledge nothing's ever
perfect but it can still be worth
remembering in other words copying until
a better idea comes along to replace
that one
whatever the problem is we can begin
generating guesses whatever the problem
is that makes us Universal Universal in
our capacity to have problems and
respond to them often we fail but
invariably we also make progress and
sometimes we succeed hence progress
all of this taken together leads to
David Deutsch's deep Insight people are
Universal explainers whatever the
physical process is can be simulated to
arbitrary accuracy by a universal
computer that's called the universality
of computation
one kind or one set even of physical
processes includes what human brains do
so in theory that too can be simulated
by a universal computer
what our minds add to this you know add
to this idea that the brain is just
performing physical processes what our
minds add to this is that the physical
processes themselves can be modeled and
comprehended
in principle by a person
the denial of this says some things are
incomprehensible by people
this idea that certain things are
incomprehensible has a long history it's
isomorphic with the claim that the mind
of the god of the abrahamic religions
being omniscient is literally
incomprehensible that's what the
religious people say
in other words it's just an appeal to
the supernatural some rationalists who
deny a belief in God nonetheless endorse
the notion that some things are beyond
the comprehension of people
those so-called rationalists are just
swapping out God for X where X is just
some other incomprehensible thing in
other words they completely endorse the
supernatural but just with a slight name
change from God to X they're favored
incomprehensible thing whether it's
aliens or super intelligence sometimes
both or in the case of many physicists
the successor Theory to Quantum Theory
that's the incomprehensible thing
whatever it is it's an appeal to the
supernatural
we don't do that those who subscribe to
purion and David Deutsch Grand Vision of
knowledge and what people are people as
knowledge or explanation creators
so none of that still produced emotion
as a fundamental part of epistemology
so because the bayesians do this and
ostensibly this podcast is about
bayesianism let me introduce emotion now
for the purposes of say decision making
as this one part of our rational
worldview making decisions is the place
where people get stuck and they want to
introduce emotions into our rational
conception of the world not to say that
motions are always an everywhere
irrational but they need not serve a
fundamental epistemological role
sometimes it's true we do not have a
good explanation in fact more often than
not
if you have a good explanation then
that's the thing you act on perhaps you
want to decide where to build a house
one choice would be a low-lying flat
area
but you make the decision not to build
there because well it's prone to
flooding good explanation logically
derived prediction reasonable decision
that's rational decision Theory that's
making a choice based upon a good
explanation
instead of building on the floodplain
you build Instead at a higher altitude
somewhere no emotions required here
except perhaps I don't know appreciation
of the beauty of the place that kind of
thing
is rational your decision and all your
decisions about building this house are
explained by good explanations even good
explanations about things like you love
this particular peaceful and friendly
Community you love your neighbors you
love your family and you want to be near
them you build a house near all those
things emotions like that are perfectly
rational and so are included in our
conception of good explanations that's
all fine
but as I say sometimes in situations
analogous to these we lack a good
explanation or I should say we lack a
good explicit explanation
you cannot write down in words exactly
what you feel good or bad about
that means it's inexplicit inexplicit
knowledge is a genuine thing that is
accounted for in the work especially of
David Deutsch it's not ruled out but
everything has to be able to be written
down in order to be a good explicit
explanation or in other words to be
within our rational conception of
knowledge we can have inexplicit
intuitions
if you have a bad feeling about
something but aren't quite sure why that
can be a kind of knowledge
all knowledge explicit or not is prone
to contain errors indeed all does
contain misconception because correcting
the misconceptions allows for Progress
to happen were there no errors to ever
correct nothing would ever need to
change so your intuition can often be
wrong it's hard to check errors and
intuitions as they are very difficult to
communicate that's the nature of
inexplicit but it doesn't mean they
should be ignored all knowledge actually
contains inexplicit content only a small
fraction is explicit good explanations
intuitions are real we've all got
emotions but you know some people rate
their emotions more strongly than others
do
what you experience as terrifying I
might not what you experience is just
mild happiness I may experiences deep
joy we can't communicate our emotions
easily by saying how strong they feel to
us because how you feel and how I feel
might be very different like the age-old
conundrum of whether the Blue Sky we're
both looking at at the same time looks
the same to us
this is the Deep problem of qualia
the Deep problem of qualia is we all
have them
we can't describe them
they are the subjective contents of
objective things
like objective things like the
wavelength of light which is how physics
quantifies and explains color from the
objective third-person perspective
there's no reference required to the
content of Mayans there psychology you
don't need Psychology to understand
wavelength of light but but there is a
world of subjective experience how
colors look and how feelings feel
you may have an intuition that a
particular neighborhood is not safe
there are cues I don't know broken
windows graffiti on the walls young men
of a certain age wearing a certain kind
of clothing
that's all explicit but it gives you the
heebie-jeebies your intuition and ideas
could be completely mistaken maybe
unlikely perhaps but maybe
it's a perfectly nice Community for all
you know that has been through just a
rough time recently with a natural
disaster
but none of that is to confuse or
conflate those two things there's the
world of objective physics the
wavelength of light and there is the
world of subjective experience the color
you see the subjective part of
everything
there is also the world of objective
knowledge epistemology and then there is
the world of mental events psychology
and the bright line between those two
things
it might be the case it's a poor
Community where everyone's actually
really nice and it's actually a really
safe place
in any case you can't quantify with any
given precise number using a measuring
device like a ruler your level of
discomfort or how accurate that level of
discomfort really is or deserves to be
you can try to rate it on a scale of one
to ten you'll fear about this particular
place you have an opinion but your
rating tells me nothing about the
objective situation is it truly a safe
or unsafe Community just because you
feel it is maybe you're just a
particularly fearful person or maybe
you're unusually used to such
neighborhoods and are not scared at all
when in fact you should be who knows
what I'm saying is these intuitions
exist they're error-prone they might be
accurate they might not be but this is
one place for emotions
if we don't have a good explanation we
might rely on emotion sometimes absent
everything else but what we're after is
good explanations but you don't have a
good explanation okay maybe you've got
an intuition
but you can't quantify an intuition even
if some people would like to put a
random guess a rating from one to ten or
a percentage on these things because our
fears and hopes are extremely subjective
and knowledge in the main is not about
fear or hope or certainty or degrees of
belief and confidence
if we need to make a decision now then
either we've got a good explanation to
act on or we don't and if we do not then
we just don't know and it's fine to say
I don't know we don't know no one knows
if you want to invest in a company now
you are not going to know how it will
perform in the future because the future
is unknowable and the company is made up
of people and there are people beyond
the company who make decisions about
what's going to cause the company to
succeed or final
but you can know which is to say have
good explanations of the company itself
right now who the CEO is who the rest of
the executive team are who the workers
are what their ethics are principles and
what the product is that they're selling
that all constitutes knowledge and can
inform your decision but beyond that
future performance you don't know and
you can't know
if you want to make a rational decision
however
it can't come down to Just A vibe A vibe
is a kind of inexplicit knowledge it can
be that maybe you have that when it
comes to people and sometimes people are
better and worse at being able to judge
other people some people seem a bit
dodgy are they cranks are they trying to
Swindle you out of your money are they
lying those like intuitions you can have
inexplicit knowledge should be taken
seriously you might be wrong but it
might be a reason to take due diligence
even further and investigate more what's
the history of the CEO for example
what's his last company in trouble for
breaking the law there's more knowledge
again none of that says we're relying
purely on guesswork and emotion to make
a decision whether to invest or not it's
not about confidence it's about
knowledge and explanation
and it's not just about a good feeling
or a bad feeling again it's bad
explanations
even the decision about who to marry or
spend your life with or who your friend
or your friends are it's not all about
feelings either of course Love's a
feeling the most valuable perhaps but
that you love your family and friends is
knowledge itself you're not confident
you love your family and friends you
know you do it's explicit knowledge
about a subjective emotion there's no
contradiction here
but some people think all of knowledge
is about emotions like this feelings
feelings that serve not just a
peripheral but a central role especially
in decision making some think that
knowledge is less about explanations and
more about predictions they are obsessed
by trying to guess what the future will
bring and try to distill epistemology
into a kind of decision engine
that is the purpose of knowledge under
for example bayesianism or what's called
bayesianism and in a sense it's why
bayesianism is so popular nowadays
people are very very animated some I
would say seem to be obsessed with
trying to guess what the future will
bring
but no one can know what the future will
bring Noah's and have a good explanation
they might call it forecasting or
predicting but it's prophecy it's a
guess about the Future made in the
absence of a good explanation it's a
guess about a future
where knowledge yet to be created will
have an impact after all if any of these
people who do this prophesying they're
so called forecasting if they had a good
explanation they just explained that
good explanation and we'd all go oh okay
that makes sense like a physicist who
predicts that when you drop a rock out a
window it will take precisely 3.2
seconds to hit the ground given a
particular height that's a prediction or
a chemist saying you know you add the
acid and the base together and you get
assault in the water that's a prediction
but when human choice is involved and
human Choice determined by human
creativity what knowledge is created
Things become inherently unpredictable
it's not like physics
but as I will come to show
bayesianism which I'm coming to
presently is less about understanding
reality as the rest of Science and
epistemologies and more about just
making decisions or it purports to be
about that anyway
and so it wants to do that so that the
future can in some way be controlled
it is an entirely different Vision about
what knowledge is and what knowledge is
for and indeed what it is even possible
to do with knowledge because the fact is
this is an epistemological law we cannot
prophesy we cannot guess the future when
knowledge yet to be created will have an
impact on this future
that's prophecy it's impossible but they
the bayesians they try to do this and
they clothe it all in a veneer of
mathematics that makes it look as if
they are being precise
I will show here and now why this entire
scheme and way of thinking is false
as I hinted right at the beginning of
this there are four strands of
bayesianism if you like so let's begin
let's begin with the first one basis
theorem that's this thing from Bayesian
statistics as distincts from Bayesian
reasoning as distinct from Bayesian
epistemology we're beginning with Bayes
theorem
this is Bayes theorem base theorem is a
mathematical theorem like Pythagoras
Theorem which is to say it can be proven
given certain axioms in the case of
basis theorem given the axioms of
probability Theory the axioms of
probability Theory usually considered
there are three of them they include in
plain English so I'm worried about the
Sim symbols that one the probability of
anything possible happening must be
greater than zero the probability of all
the possible things that could happen
add up to one and feel mutually
exclusive events the probability of them
both is their sum you add them together
so a straightforward example of all
those things put together is the
probability of heads or tails when you
flip a coin is one because each of them
is a half and a half plus a half is one
to get to Bayes theorem to prove it
which I'm not going to do
you first need to derive what's known as
conditional probability this is the
formula for that some people just regard
this as yet another Axiom you can get
there from the previous three axioms or
whatever the case
this is often argued for as a separate
theorem which it is conditional
probability says that the probability of
a given the probability of B is the
probability of A and B happening divided
by the probability of a
let's do a quick example I think I can
do this in podcast Audio Only format
because the mats are simple the classic
example is where you think of a family
which has two kids and we want to know
the gender of the kids the possibilities
are two girls two boys a boy and a girl
or a girl and a boy if we're talking
about the order in which they're born
let's say we ask the question what is
the probability that both our girls
given at least one is a girl this is a
classic conditional probability question
well you ask the parents do you have at
least one daughter they say yes so now
you've got this extra informational
conditional probability takes this extra
information into account and ultimately
that's what bass does as well you're so
cool update your priors they say
now absent any further information such
as at least one of them as a girl and
you ask you know what's the probability
of two girls well you've got the four
possibilities right you've got girl girl
boy boy boy girl girl boy okay equal
probability of each in theory so that's
a one in four chance of having two girls
because only one of them one of those
possibilities those four possibilities
is two girls okay it's either two girls
or two boys or there's two ways in which
you can have a boy and a girl
now the naive interpretation people who
don't understand probability they've
never bothered thinking about this and
they're asked the question you know
what's the probability given at least
one as a girl the probability of two
girls they say Well it can't change it's
still one in four but that's incorrect
if you're told at least one of them is a
girl then immediately you rule out out
of those four possibilities the boy boy
possibility it changes the calculation
it can no longer be a one in four chance
given no information it's a one in four
chance okay because if you've got two
kids there's a one in four chance that
you've got two girls
if you're told at least one of them's a
girl then you can rule out the two of
them are boys okay so that's what the
additional information is telling you
so you rule out the boy boy possibility
which means you're down to only three
options to consider the possibilities
now are given that at least one is a
girl either there's two girls there's a
boy and a girl or there's a girl and a
boy in other words there's a one in
three chance that there are two girls
given at least one as a girl again the
chance of both being girls given at
least one is is actually one in three
not one in four
now let me take off my Bayesian
probability hat and put on my critical
rationalism hat
because all of that way of talking
assumes something quite false about the
world it assumes an idealization it
assumes pure mathematics is the way in
which the world truly behaves the world
does obey mathematical laws but not
those ones
because what it assumes is false is the
fact that the chance of a boy and a girl
or boy or a girl I should say is 50 50.
but there's a 50 50 split of boys and
girls in the population but it's not
it's not exactly that
the reality is not a 50 50 split
according to well-established statistics
it's more like 105 to 100 boys to girls
and that's only about
but also to go from that statistic to a
probability is a big logical leap to go
from that statistic of what is happening
now in the past to what will happen in
the future is also a logical leap it
depends upon knowledge like to think of
a an awful example the ratio is going to
be very different to that
in China where people will have
abortions early on so this is what is
born but people there want to have it in
certain other cultures they want to have
boys
and so it can radically change given
people's knowledge and understanding and
theories about the world and culture and
all that kind of stuff so this is all
affected by knowledge you can't make a
prediction about the future given what
has happened in the past
as I say to go from the statistic to the
probability is a big logical leap
probability does not track reality
exactly and this is where all the
problems with bayesianism start
and it's not just with Trope examples
like this it's everything everywhere all
the time
even coin tosses
when you toss a coin in the real world
it's not 50 50. it deviates from that
because what governs what a coin does is
the laws of physics not the axioms of
probability you could say all day long
that a coin is fair but a physical real
world coin is not an idealization it's a
physical object it won't come out
perfectly 50 50 just do the experiment
yourself
I'll come back to that
let me just give basis theorem it's due
none of this is a problem for purely
abstract mathematics there it works
works in scare quotes works for what
works for doing pure mathematics in
other words a kind of puzzle which
doesn't apply strictly to the real world
and if you confine yourself to the
purely imaginary abstract world of pure
mathematics idealized coins idealized
dice idealized ratios of male to female
births then it works abstractly it's a
perfectly fine theorem you can prove it
it doesn't mean it's been proven true as
a matter of applying to the real
physical world indeed it demonstrably
does not strictly apply in the real
world none of probability does
but it gets worse even what I've
suggested so far because for those
idealizations where you simply Define
coin tosses as 50 50 or dice where each
side has exactly the same one in six
chance of occurring all males to females
as being 50 exactly it could likely to
be born at least you have something
defined beforehand you know beforehand
what the probability should be you've
defined them into existence this is what
our priori means a priori before you
have any facts about the world you just
Define things
that's one view of how probability works
you define probabilities into existence
coins have two sides they're Fair it's
50 50. diets have six sides they're Fair
it's one and six that's our priority the
other vision of probability is called
frequentialist it's a posteriori after
the fact and what that means is you do
experiments you collect data in the real
world and you build up a statistical
model a table of frequencies and then
you approximate those numbers you say
well you know you flip the coin enough
times it's close enough to 50 50. or you
roll the dice enough and it's close
enough to one in six on each side and
well you know you make this extra
assumption you apply the real world and
say well if if you could do an
infinitely long run then you'd
asymptotically approach these ideal
numbers
okay but again you've left the realm of
physics and Science and physical reality
because the real world is not data
collection off into Infinity that's not
a real experiment you can't do an
observation often to Infinity you're
imagining doing so that's not science
but that's what Bayesian reasoning is it
says we can reason on the basis that the
data over the long run matches what the
upriori assumptions would be
so Bayesian statistics Builds on this
notion that aposteriori the data We
Gather The More We Gather we assume that
in the long run the data amounts to
being some kind of probability
let me just read from what the Wikipedia
article says on this
we can read it together basing
statistics is a theory in the field of
Statistics based on the Bayesian
interpretation of probability where
probability expresses a degree of belief
in an event the degree of belief maybe
based on prior knowledge about the event
such as the results of previous
experiments or on personal beliefs about
the event this differs from a number of
other interpretations of probabilities
such as the frequentis interpretation
that views probability as the limit of
the relative frequency of an event after
many trials
does that sound rational to you does
that sound objective to you reasonable
even
that's what Bayesian statistics is
and it is openly admitted everywhere
that what you have is either the
frequentalist interpretation of
probability you know after many runs the
limit you know asymptotically approaches
the up Priority probability I've all
I've already explained that's literally
not true
we don't have access to infinitely long
runs that's not the physical world we
have finite data sets but the Wikipedia
article talks about our degree of belief
which is purely subjective straight up
and down purely subjective
and if I can add some personal anecdotes
to this I have talked to people directly
involved in this kind of stuff using
this reasoning that work for insurance
companies that kind of thing and they
speak of talking to subject matter
experts that's what they fall back on
Experts opinion in order to provide the
numbers the priors so they can then do
base in statistics so it's absolutely
used I'm saying it's not rational to do
so in many cases
it really is garbage and garbage out
the subject matter expert tells you what
their priors are how did they come up
with those they guess them or they rely
on frequentest explanation that the past
will resemble the future and it might in
some situations absent everything else
but actually actually there often is an
underlying good explanation which they
might not be aware of
anyway whatever the case the subject
matter expert invents their prior you
put those prize into your theorem and
you crank the numbers and you spit out a
probability
and so they say when new evidence comes
in you go back to the subject matter
expert have them update their prior and
repeat
at no point in this process are you
getting genuine objectivity you just say
you are given that the expert changes
their opinion because something happens
in the real world that refutes their
guess
but they still guess the pure emotional
guesswork is still there
and they're prophesying and so you if
you're using this particular way to try
and forecast the future
but other cases where nonetheless this
can be informative absolutely this is
the point where in the explanation of
this people just completely ignore I
ever say this stuff so I just want to
highlight it I'm saying right now here
at this moment there are times when
Bayesian reasoning of this sort can be
useful
that doesn't mean that it applies to the
real world in the same way that
Newtonian physics is not a description
or explanation of the real world it's
just a heuristic that can be helpful in
some situations but you need to keep in
mind it's not literally a description of
reality it's been refuted so too with
probability Theory
we need to extract out the feelings of
the subject matter expert in order to be
more rational about this
forget about degree of belief stick to a
frequentialist approximation
let me go back to my own article about
this that makes the point this is my
article that I'm going to be reading
from in the next
this article I wrote long ago about what
I thought about basis theorem and I've
kind of changed my mind on the fact that
I actually think it's employed in a far
more egregious way than even what I
admit to here here I was trying to be
too kind to the bayesians I was giving
them too much leeway and saying yeah
they're doing their best to be rational
now I'm even less confident you might
say about the degree to which they are
being rational even with the
frequentialist uh uses of data in order
to try and convert statistics into
probabilities but let's give them their
due and let me read from this article
where I say admit concede that there are
sometimes some narrow places where you
might use this stuff but even then as we
will see not really
what does this even mean in plain
English it says that the probability of
something labeled a happening given that
you know that something B has actually
happened that's what p a line b means
the probability of a given that B has
happened it's equal to the probability
that thing B has happened given that
thing a has happened multiplied by the
probability of a all divided by the
probability of B okay there we go now
let's go through a kind of real life
example
long before covert casting your mind
back to 2016 there was another virus
going around it was called the zika
virus the zika virus was prevalent
around Brazil
let's say you've been to Brazil 2016 you
come home and you don't feel so good but
you've seen the news zika virus is going
around Brazil and you're suddenly very
worried
have I got the zika virus you think
well you rush off to the doctor to get
tested
look says the doctor don't worry zinc is
actually really rare there's been a lot
of media hype I know
of all the people who come back from
Brazil only about one in every ten
thousand of them will actually have the
virus but says the doctor you're in luck
to put your mind at ease we've got a
test and that test is 99 accurate and it
gives instant results so let's get this
over and done with right now and you can
go home confident in the knowledge about
whether you are infected or not
that sounds promising you think you of
course immediately have the test done
your blood is taken it's run through the
machine and the computer screen flashes
red it's a positive result Oh no you're
infected
wow slow down the tiger stop right there
are you really infected the test is not
perfect remember in fact it's wrong one
percent of the time the doctor said 99
accurate but what they mean is 99 of the
time positive results are really
positive and negative results are
actually negative in other words the
doctor implicitly gives you the rate of
false positive and false negative in
both cases they're one percent
just to labor that point as a bit of an
aside it's important to note that in
this case the 99 accuracy means it's
also wrong one percent of the time when
you get a negative result as well but
the false negatives and false positives
don't need to be the same and in general
they aren't for these kind of medical
tests sometimes you need to take that
particular difference into account uh on
the idea of false negatives if you're
unlikely to have the disease and the
test tells you that you don't have it
well you probably don't have it right
well yes but there's still a chance can
we quantify the chance yes we can in our
case I'm assuming that for this
particular virus the zika test the false
negative probability is also one percent
which is actually quite High remarkably
high for these kind of tests so if the
test says you don't have it there's
actually a one percent chance you do and
the test didn't pick it up
so you know just emphasize that the
false positive and false negative
numbers do not have to be the same
usually they're not the chance that a
test is exactly 99 accurate for
positives and negative results isn't
realistic but we're using that number
here because it's easier to understand
and apply basis theorem on but just
appreciate that you could have one
percent false positive and like you know
five percent false negative or whatever
anyway moving on
you're thinking to yourself you're happy
that you've been told 99 accuracy uh is
uh sounds like a good number to you 99
accurate that's highly accurate right no
99 is actually not a high probability at
all given the other numbers you're
talking about what might be considered
high or not is relative to the situation
if it's a 99 chance you'll win the
million dollar lottery absolutely buy a
ticket but if it's downsides where the
stakes are high forget it not for
something where life and death is
involved would I regard 99 being a high
enough number consider would you get on
an aircraft that had a safety record of
99 out of 100 safe Landings I wouldn't
would you eat at a restaurant where
every 99th customer got really severe
food poisoning but everyone else just
had a wonderful time strangely surely
not 99 isn't that high compared to much
higher probabilities
you need to recalibrate your
expectations of what a high probability
is in this context to get a sense of why
Bay sometimes actually rather often
throws up counter-intuitive predictions
for aircraft you'd probably want the
number to be
9999 out of 10 000 or something like
that to feel marginally better as for
crashes where everyone on board dies I
want the number to be you know 999 999
out of every million flights in reality
it's more like one out of every 24
million trips of fatal crashes or
something like that so that's the order
of probability where you're talking safe
so let's look at this base theorem
example in plain English first given the
chance of you being infected with zika
you've been told by the doctor is one in
ten thousand if you've been to Brazil
and you have now we want to know what is
the chance given you've been to Brazil
and you've also tested positive on a
test it's 99 accurate
well it turns out it's not 99 the chance
of you having the virus is not 99 even
though it's 99 accurate what what are
you talking about brittle well this is
the whole point of Bayes theorem and
Bayesian style reasoning
put it another way if you've never been
to Brazil if you've been living in
isolation in Antarctica say for the last
two years with little outside contact
and someone comes down there and tests
you for zika and you test positive on a
test that's 99 accurate what's the best
explanation
say an expert tropical disease a doctor
says the chance of such a person having
zika transmitted by mosquitoes by the
way it's actually one in one trillion
then you need to think to yourself is it
more likely you actually have zika or
that the test has given you a false
positive
what's the better explanation
the better explanation is the test has
made a mistake and you better repeat it
which of course by the way it's exactly
what is often done
it's true these matters are sometimes
hard to think clearly about Nasim to
Labs made an entire career basically on
writing books about exactly this kind of
thing
the chances are you don't have zika if
you're the person in Antarctica after
all the very means of transmission via
mosquitoes is basically impossible down
there given that no insect can survive
in those conditions
the one in a trillion number simply
swamps the 99 accurate one yes you might
have zika but based on the mathematics
of the situation and nothing else if you
want to make a prediction you'd want to
wager that you don't have zika but
typically More Than Mathematics is
important in those situations in real
life in real life namely what's your
reason for thinking you had secret all
in the first place it can't just be the
positive test right surely it feels sick
if you're getting tested in Antarctica
and wife is zika and et cetera Etc
consider real life not just the abstract
mathematical thought experiment
so let's go back to our original
situation back to the doctor's office
you're sitting there and you have
actually been to Brazil and our numbers
are 99 accurate test and a one in ten
thousand chance of having the virus
giving you a in Brazil now let's use our
theorem what's the probability you are
infected with zika given a one in ten
thousand chance of people like you
actually get infected and you've just
tested positive on test it's 99 accurate
let's whip out our formula
here we need to set What A and B mean
a means you are infected with the zika
virus b means you test positive the a
line B bit the probability of a given B
that bit on the right hand side is in
this case the probability that you have
the disease given you tested positive
it's what we do not yet know
on the right hand side the probability
of B given a that is in this case the
probability that you test positive if
you actually have the disease we know
this it's 99 or in decimals 0.99
the probability of a bit is the
probability that you have the disease at
all without the information contained in
B in other words it's one in ten
thousand or North Point North North 1 in
decimal form
the denominator the probability of B bit
that is the probability that you test
positive given no prior knowledge making
no other assumptions whatsoever to
figure this number out one needs to
understand that if you're the one person
in ten thousand has zika there's a 99
chance it reports that number accurately
in other words it's naught Point North 1
times 0.99
but also and this is really important
you could be one of the 999 out of ten
thousand who don't have the disease and
yet are unlucky enough to be in the one
percent who test positive to the test
anyway that sounds complicated
but that is how we get the probability
of B in this case we need to add
together the positive tests that are
correct 99 of the one in ten thousand to
have it to the positive tests that
aren't one percent of the 999 out of ten
thousand who don't
so probability of B becomes 0.99 times
0.1 plus 0.01 times
0.99999 all right let's put all of that
into our formula
so there's the calculation let me
continue reading from my article here
and text us up on the screen when you do
that calculation my calculator speaks
out the answer of naught Point naught
naught nine eight or in other words 0.98
percent
in other words there's still less than a
one percent chance of actually having
the disease
it's pretty strong isn't it we went to
get a test for a disease and the test is
99 accurate and we actually test
positive but our chances of having the
disease are less than one percent
what the heck is going on
well what's going on is well it's just
mathematical reality the chances of
having the disease at all in the first
place given you know coming back from
Brazil and having diseases pretty rare
in first place is 0.01 percent
getting a positive test raises that
chance not to 99 but only about 100
times more okay than 0.01 which is about
one percent I know it's counterintuitive
but that's the whole thing about these
Bayesian reasoning type stuff it's weird
but true and that kind of
counter-intuitive stuff is what some
people love they love it and Having
learned it they like to want to apply it
to everything
I mean it is thrilling to understand
something like that like when you really
get it for the first time you go wow
that's really cool I think some people
have a little feeling of superiority
when they understand something like that
I feel like I understand something that
other people don't know now I'm going to
hold it over them
they want to apply it as I said to
almost everything now they understand
that it works there I think this can
work everywhere it's a universal truth
about the world
it's not far removed from what people
really do you know here's where the
famous philosopher Nick Bostrom applies
to concerns about robots who might take
over the world and now because they'll
reason like a perfect Bayesian and he
thinks that we should try and emulate
that perfect way of reasoning there's
Bayesian reasoning everywhere all the
time and I think that's just completely
wrong it is counterintuitive but it
doesn't mean it works everywhere in fact
it doesn't even work here
as I say after all strictly speaking the
frequentialist interpretation
probability is false it's just not true
that you know there's 99 of tests that
have been tested themselves before for
accuracy applies now in the future they
can improve the test the test could be
changed your particular test might not
be representative of all the other tests
there's a lot of things to say here
about this basis theorem is a theory of
probability here it's being ported into
statistics
which is already a logical leap
is that legitimate well that's open for
debates but these numbers are being used
here are still idealizations even if
they're based upon the past
the fundamental Axiom we talked about
before past performance is no indication
of future Trends even here of course if
you've got nothing else to go on then
yeah it's a guide but it's not strictly
speaking reality and it applies when
you've got some information forget about
the nuclear apocalypse forget about
super intelligence taking over there you
don't have any numbers at all to
substitute into any formula anywhere
let me come to that
the statistical argument I've just given
you which employs Bays it's a good
intuition pump it does refute common
sense so that's good it's a critique of
Common Sense on this you're given a 99
accurate test you still don't have the
disease in all likelihood given the
numbers that's an interesting refutation
worth taking mental note off but Common
Sense was corralled artificially into
this thought experiment in the first
place in real life of course you do way
more than is going on in this artificial
imaginary example really all that's
happening here even with the zika virus
example it's still a pure mathematics
example in real life you demand good
explanations you want more than one test
you're going to talk about symptoms with
your doctor there's all sorts of things
that are actually really going to go on
rather than you just relying on the
result of a test
but once you've learned this once you've
learned this interesting quirky thing
about Bayesian reasoning that I've just
told you if you've never thought of it
before besides you have a 99 test
possibly being completely wrong even
though 99 seems too high once you know
that well you know it and you can carry
it Forward into your reasoning about the
world but just one part of reasoning
it's not the entirety of all reasoning
all the time everywhere
but that turning that into an entire
world view
brings me to okay moving from basis
theorem which we did to that thing there
which was based in statistics brings me
to Bayesian reasoning and that's
different from distinct from Bayesian
statistics basic statistics is a kind of
pure mathematics tool assuming the
frequencies are actual probabilities
so let's move to Bayesian reasoning
rather a lot of what goes under the
umbrella of so-called Bayesian reasoning
takes the statistical argument I've just
given with all of its numbers and the
use of the formula and takes that away
extracts out the numbers forget about
the numbers and forget about the use of
the literal formula
and goes to subject matter experts for
just their Vibe about what the
probability of anything has it might be
you know they're feeling the chance that
you have the zika virus is something or
other or the chance of surviving a
nuclear Holocaust let's say this century
is going to be five percent and add
infinitum for any disaster that might
happen in the future or anything that's
going to happen in the future you just
consult the expert and they'll just make
up a number and this is said to be
Bayesian reasoning
and then of course you add to that well
we update our prize when our mind
changes
but okay even if you grant that now that
you know our posteriori given some data
after the fact you've still got a
problem because Bayesian reasoning as I
say is often not about any data most of
the time they don't include that I don't
talk about data it's not about long
lists of numbers and data sets
approximately coming to represent some a
priori probability there are no other
priority probabilities after all an
upriori probability is what the
probability is of something you know
beforehand
but there's no a priority probability of
the nuclear Holocaust in other words by
definition in the same way we Define the
chance of rolling a five on a fair dice
to be one and six what is the same kind
of thing when it comes to probability of
nuclear Holocaust
the question makes no sense there is no
by definition probability of this
well okay so there's no by definition
what the probability of a nuclear
Holocaust will be or any other disaster
or anything else happening in the future
like that and what about our posteriori
then after the fact never mind
definitions given some data so you know
like in the zika virus case we do lots
of tests and find it works 99 of the
time after lots and lots of Trials so
it's not by definition that's 99 so you
have to actually do the experiment out
in the world up posterioro what's the
our posterior chance of nuclear
Holocaust well again it makes no sense
we don't have a long run of nuclear
holocausts where we can find out the
chance of surviving one and don't say we
can simulate those things in a computer
because that begs the question
simulating such things assumes you
already know what's going to happen your
programming in your guests the very
thing you're saying the probability is
there for determining patient reasoning
like this this so-called Bayesian
reasoning doesn't actually even talk
about numbers most of the time at all it
just pretends to
it's used in cases where you do not even
know going in what the our priority
probabilities would be and you don't
know after the fact because you don't
have any data to go on what they are
posteriori probabilities are the
frequent frequencies are
it's it's always stuff like you know
when they talk about how this works in
fundamental terms they use Trope
examples like now what's the probability
you're going to need an umbrella today
this is the way it's supposed to work
so let's say you don't know if you need
an umbrella Cloud you look outside and
you see clouds ah you update your prior
they're not rain clouds they are clouds
so you know you've got a higher
probability so you're going to rate it
not 50 50 but you know maybe it's 60
that it's going to rain so do you carry
an umbrella based on that or not well
precisely is the probability of even
making up 60 this is what the subject
matter expert does you actually don't
know there's no repeated measurements
you can fall back on there's no
statistics no frequency hence there can
be no probability there's nothing to
update no matter what other information
you get because you haven't actually got
a probability you've just made something
up
well maybe you can switch on the
television and there you hear on the
weather report 70 of chance of rain
today so do you combine that with your
original 60 guess and somehow update
your prior
do you carry an umbrella now or not well
it's a bit of a heavy encumbrance so
there's an opportunity cost there is it
worth it oh and also what if the weather
report you were watching was actually
last night's you've recorded it and you
don't realize you're watching a
recording and it's not actually talking
about today talking about yesterday now
what
all of these are pseudo problems I say
pseudo problems because they're problems
for base in epistemology which is not a
real thing
based in reason it doesn't work on
actual epistemology that which popper
and Deutsch explain you've either got a
good explanation It Will Rain or you
don't you error correct you guess you
don't need to pretend you've got
probabilities we're updating prize
you're guessing and checking that's it
and you're admitting when you don't know
I for one rarely carry an umbrella no
matter what unless it's absolutely
torrential most of the time I've got a
good explanation that even if it is
torrential rain outside I'm walking
usually in places that are undercover
I'm like local areas undercover if you
want to get to the train it's all
undercover there the reality is I'm
undercover most of the time no matter
what the weather is like so it's not
worth me lugging around an umbrella
maybe very rarely if I know I'm walking
some distance I've got a Crossroads and
it's torture rain there's literally no
other option and I really don't want to
get wet the real life situation never
requires this so-called Bayesian
reasoning
this is also true for stuff involving
risk management and predicting the stock
market at best you have a frequentialist
interpretation based on past trends but
every single legal right up to a device
in these areas literally says quote past
performance is not indicative of future
results end quote
the legal system for once actually gets
this stuff correct it's a refutation
right there of Bayesian reasoning of
inductivism of this entire way of
thinking past performance is not
indicative of future results end of
now put everything I've said together
all the stuff about base theorem basing
statistics Bayesian reasoning put it in
a box tie a big bowl around the whole
mess and you can call it by using
epistemology
now for many so-called epistemologists
in the Bayesian mold some kinds of
physicists less so philosophers some of
them
Now call all of that knowledge itself a
kind of way in which past performance
really can tell you about the future and
creativity in the future label it
Bayesian epistemology
if you're amazing and you'll subscribe
to the epistemology you can say the way
we create knowledge is a kind of
prediction of the future given what
happened in the past and say that the
way we evaluate claims is by updating
priors but never actually talk about
numbers or the theorem itself
that Bayesian reasoning with or without
numbers is a way of increasing our
confidence or Credence in beliefs and so
we return full circle to inserting
emotion and feelings and Vibes into
epistemology where it was never needed
in the papyrian and David Deutsche view
of this whole thing
eviscerated any mention of Vibes and
feelings and emotions in epistemology we
didn't need any of that we didn't need
to be confident or certain we just
relied upon the objective existence of
good explanations or not
knowledge on The papyrian View and David
deutsche's view is that that staff
knowledge is a physical structure in the
real world
it's out there instantiated somewhere or
other
it can be represented in any of a number
of different physical forms different
instantiations but it does rest upon
laws of physics
it's more allied with the laws of
physics and physics than it is to do
with Vibes in the minds of people
or a kind of strength of faith and a
belief
so you have a choice by using
epistemology not rational emotional
about confidence degrees of belief
Credence feelings and emotions you can
have that or you can choose popular in
epistemology
rational an understanding of the physics
of the situation problems and their
objective Solutions good explanations if
a bright line between these two things
the opposition between the rational and
the irrational
by using epistemology takes what is good
in epistemology ignores it all and
substitutes for the rational the
emotional
for more on all of this if you want
something even longer in Greater depth
consult here my lengthy piece about
Bayesian reasoning as explained by one
of its most eloquent popularizes Stephen
Pinker in his book titled rationality in
a chapter titled base in reasoning
there I explained his perspective and I
compare it to critical rationalism
and here I'm now happy to discuss
questions people have criticisms of my
view here or just talk about Bayesian
reasoning and compare it to critical
rationalism and what I would say is
genuine objective epistemology and how
to make decisions rationally which in
particular requires us to admit when we
do not know and we're just going on the
vibe rather than resting upon good
explanations